Weather fronts

In the last couple of videos we have seen how the conservation of potential vorticity leads to generally zonal flows, partitions the atmosphere up into distinct convections cells that are separated by incredibly intense eartward jets, and that these jets can support planetary-scale Rossby waves, the biggest waves on the planet, that are able to transport cold or warm air masses 10s of degrees of latitude north or south, and dominate the weather over much of the planet.

Here we want to know how these waves actually affect the weather?

Rossby waves, particularly those that travel on the polar jet streams, tend to delineate regions of cold, dry poleward air and warmer, moist equatorward air. At the surface, the boundary where these air masses meet is referred to as a front, which is quite often a region of strong winds and active rain and inclement weather.

There are 4 distinct types of front, which in terms of Rossby wave, can loosely be thought of as phases or dynamics of the Rossby waves.

All four are featured in this animation and here we’ll go through them individually.

The first is a warm front, where in the boundary is moving poleward, tending to bring warm moist air towards the poles and displacing the cold dry air back toward the poles. Because the warm moist air is less dense than the cold dry air, this warm air tends to ride over the top of the cold air, meaning the front slopes towards the direction of boundary motion and typically produces light high-level clouds. Towards the base of the warm front, the warm moist air is cooled by the underlying cold air and condenses to create thicker low level clouds and often rain. As the warm front passes over a point, the surface pressure decreases because the air above becomes less dense; this is a direct result of the hydrostatic balance. The wind direction often changes either side of the front. The Rossby wave phase associated with a warm front is when a wavepeak is moving poleward.

The second type of front is a cold front, where in the boundary moves equatorward, with the cold dry polar air displacing the warm air back towards the equator. In cold fronts, the cold air is more dense than the warm air, so the cold air tends to get in under the warm air and lift it up, causing more rain, and slope the front away from the direction of frontal motion. As the cold front passes a point, the surface pressure tends to increase as warm air is displaced by denser cold air. The Rossby wave phase associated with a cold front is when a wavepeak is moving equatorward.

The third type of front is a stationary front. Here, the cold and warm air masses might be blocked or arrested. Winds tend to flow along the front, in opposite directions either side of the front. The Rossby wave phase associated with a stationary front is between wavepeaks, where the cold-warm boundary is stationary or not moving very much.

The fourth type of front is called an occluded front. This happens when a cold front catches and overtakes a warm front. The occurrence of occluded fronts in the Australian region is rare; it usually requires substantial mountain ranges to block or stall the leading warm front and allow the trailing cold front to catch up. These fronts are associated with severe weather; basically all the moisture in the air is precipitated out as rail, hail or snow, in a very short time. In terms of the Rossby wave phase, an occluded front is what happens when a Rossby wave breaks, and pinches off a cyclone of cold polar air that remains as a low pressure system.

Fronts are regions of dynamic atmospheric activity, usually associated with rain and unsettled weather conditions. While they aren’t exclusively generated by Rossby waves, the equatorward-poleward meandering of the jet streams by Rossby waves certainly produce a myriad of fronts; for instance, most of the weather and frontal systems experienced by us here in southern Australia are the result of Rossby wave dynamics. There are other processes that can produce air masses with substantially different temperatures and in close proximity to each other; and we’ll have a look at some of these in the next couple of videos.
