Fronts and eddies

We started this week by looking at the largest scale circulation of the global oceans, the meridional overturning circulation, and have seen how the prevailing winds set up the basin scale gyres, and how the maintaining potential vorticity within these gyres leads to their western intensification and the establishment of the western boundary currents. Here we are going to continue working towards smaller scales and begin looking into ocean variability, or ocean weather, specifically ocean fronts and eddies.

The gyres have the ability of transporting waters of different temperatures and salinities huge distances and bringing them into contact with other waters that are quite often of very different temperatures and salinities, thereby establishing and maintaining fronts throughout the oceans, and particularly in their western boundary currents and poleward flanks. These ocean fronts are long-lived and share a lot in common with the atmospheric fronts that you saw last week; they tend to be regions of intense dynamics, inclement conditions and smaller-scale flows. As with the atmospheric fronts, the ocean fronts are associated with intense along-front flows, as per the thermal wind balance.

The ocean fronts have another feature in common with the atmospheric fronts; they tend to align themselves zonally, or east-west. This is particularly the case in the Southern Ocean; the Antarctic Circumpolar Current is a network of fronts that circumnavigate Antarctica. And when you think about these fronts, and how they tend to align themselves zonally, and flows tend to flow along them zonally, you might begin to wonder how things ever get across them; how things ever flow north-south, which is obviously required for the ocean to do its job in Earth’s climate. The fronts are aligned east-west, and flows are most intense east-west, so how does anything flow north-south?

Well, the intense flows along the fronts, often referred to as oceanic jets, host meandering waves and instabilities that develop and grow and lead to the emergence of eddies; coherent packets of fluid with horizontal scales of around 100km or less and timescales of about a month or so, which are referred to as the mesoscale. These eddies are the weather of the ocean. And these eddies are the primary process by which tracer, like heat, is able to get across the fronts; cold core eddies spin off the fronts and head to lower latitudes, while warm core eddies spin off heading polewards. This reason is why they are so crucially important to represent is global ocean and climate models.

Eddies are ubiquitous throughout the global oceans. They often take the form of well defined rings that extend to great depth. Their lengthscale is rather specific; while they are typically generated by frontal systems that have all lengthscales of variability available to them, all the eddies tend to be about the same size, which suggests it is set by some type of intrinsic dynamic. The lengthscale of ocean eddies is what we call the rossby deformation radius. This is given as the 

LR = NH/fpi

What this actually is is a ratio of the speed of the geostrophic flow to the rotation timescale f; so this is actually a distance, the distance that the geostrophic flow travels in a rotation timescale. So when you think of it like this, it is equivalent to our Foucault pendulum no longer swinging back-and-forth but only swinging around and around upon itself. So it makes sense that the entirety of ocean variability tends to break itself up into these discrete eddies, all rotating upon themselves, and surviving as these coherent packets of water tracer anomalies.

The fact that most of the ocean variability self-organises itself into these mesoscale eddies, it shouldn;t be a surprise that about half the total ocean kinetic and potential energies are contained in the global eddy field and at the mesoscale, with the other half being in the general circulation at the largest possible scales.

The eddy field is largely in a geostrophic balance. The processes that generated the individual eddies in the first place may not have been geostrophic; but once the eddies form and settle, the geostrophic balance describes their state well. This in itself is quite remarkable; the inherently turbulent and time-dependent flows of the ocean variability, the ocean eddy field, actually has a rather well-behaved nature to it in that it maintains the geostrophic balance, meaning that we actually have a chance at modelling and simulating it.

Next up we will take a look at a couple of processes that can form eddies.
