Gyres

Last time we saw the global ocean overturning circulation that arises from the differential heating and cooling at the ocean surface. This is the largest scale circulation of the oceans, but it is by far the whole story. For instance, this buoyancy-forced circulation can be established and maintained in the absence of surface winds, which we know are important drivers of ocean dynamics. Here we take a step in from the global scale and look at another large component of the general circulation of the oceans; which are the gyres.

If we remember back to last week and the general circulation of the atmosphere, the atmosphere was broken up into 6 convection cells, the hadley, polar, and mid-latutide ferrel cells.

Unwrapping these might look something like this, with the trade winds straddling the equator, the westerlies or roaring forties at higher latitudes, and the polar easterlies at the higher polar latitudes.

If we remember back a little further we come to Ekman dynamics, and how the transport within the surface Ekman layer in the ocean tends to be oriented 45 degrees to the wind above it, and to the left in the southern hemisphere and to the right in the northern hemisphere. This means that here in the trade winds, the ekman transport in the upper layer is poleward in both hemispheres, tending to upwell equatorial waters and push it away from the equator. For these westerlies, however, the ekman transport tends to be equatorward, still to the left in the south and right in the north. So the combined effect of the prevailing trade and westerly winds leads to a piling up or doming of surface waters at the latitudes inbetween.

Now this dome of surface waters has a hydrostatic pressure anomaly; it can be almost a meter higher than the local geopotential. And so, this hydrostatic pressure gradient tries to drive a flow down the gradient, and this flow is in turn deflected by coriolis, to the left in the south and right in the north, and turns until the coriolis acceleration balances the hydrostatic pressure gradient. This leads to the formation of an anticyclonic, high pressure system occupying the 5 major ocean basins; the north and south pacific and atlantic, and the indian.

These basin scale circulations are called gyres. And while the ekman transport at the surface only reaches a few tens to maybe a hundred meters at most, because it piles the ocean surface up and converges it at the basin scale, this leads to a hydrostatic adjustment that is able to be felt through the entire water column. So these gyres tend to be deep, not quite full depth but almost, depending on the winds and stratification (which can limit the vertical extent of the hydrostatic pressure gradient). The surface convergence also leads to a general downwelling throughout the gyre.

The basin scale convergence of surface waters also encourages any surface floaters or debris to converge and increase concentration towards the centre of the gyre, and because it is buoyant, it can’t sink (like the opposite of the ekman upwelling tea leaves). These regions have been getting quite a bit of interest of late; these are the great garbage patches of the global oceans.

So there are 5 major ocean gyres, the north and south pacific and atlantic, and the indian ocean gyre. These are all anticcyclonic, and driven by ekman transport resulting from the prevailing overhead winds. These are often referred to a the sub-tropical gyres, particularly when distinguishing them from the sub-polar gyres.

The sub-polar gyres exist between the mid-latitude westerlies and the polar easterlies; these are relatively smaller than the sub-torpiocal gyres, and because of the directions of the prevailing winds, tend to be cyclonic, and regions of low hydrostatic pressure. The cyclonic sub-polar gyres also tend to be regions of upwelling as the surface waters are diverged away by the ekman transport.

Gyres are large-scale wind-driven features of the global ocean, that establish because of the overlying prevailing winds of the general circulation in the atmosphere. While they must circulate around without a net volume transport, because that are stable long lived features they provide structure and pathways to the ocean to transport heat; the poleward legs of the sub-tropical gyres advect warm equatorial waters to higher latitudes, and the ewquatorward legs bring cooler waters back to the equator. Note that the sense of circulation of these gyres are always such that the warmer legs are on the western sides of the basins, and the cooler legs are on the eastern sides. This is a dynamic that we’ll see in more detail next time.
