Stratification (sidewall heating of a stratification vs homogenous environment)

In this video we are going to take quick and qualitative look at an important aspect of Earth’s climate: stratification. This is the term used to describe how the density of a fluid changes with depth; an environment in which the surface fluid is less dense than the bottom fluid is referred to as a stratified environment, with the strength of the stratification depending on the relative density difference between the top and bottom fluids.

We will follow through a simple demonstration to explore the concept of stratification.

Picture a fluid that is completely mixed and unstratified.

I have prepared one here to help you imagine it.

This is a tank that is completely full with fresh tap water and at room temperature. On the side of the tank is an open cavity that is made entirely of copper wrapped in white contact. There is a small tube that we use here to inject some blue dye into the fluid. Now the procedure here is to fill the open cavity with hot water. Now the heat from the hot water conducts through the copper sidewall and begins to warm up the water in the ambient; this warm water is less dense that the ambient, and it begins to rise. It rises all the way to the surface, and outflows along the surface of the ambient. This is because the warm water is less dense than the room temperature water, and the system is readjusting, or stratifying, itself into a state of minimum potential energy where all the heavy stuff is at the bottom and the light stuff is at the top.

Now imagine that we do this same experiment, but instead of starting with a mixed homogenous ambient, we start with an ambient that already has a stratification. Here, I have filled half of the tank (the bottom half) with salty water, and then I carefully fill the top half of the tank with fresh water; this need to be done carefully so as to minimise any mixing between the salty and fresh waters, and we use a little boat with a porous base to achieve this. Because the salty water is more dense than the fresh water, it will remain at the bottom, and the fresh water will remain at the top. Now we fill the open cavity with hot water; again, the heat conducts through the sidewall of the cavity and begins to warm the ambient water immediately adjacent. This water begins to rise, but the presence of the salt stratification gets in the way; the warmed water in the lower salty layer tends to remain in the lower layer and not rise full depth. Even though it is relatively warm, being salty means that it is not light enough to rise through the fresh water. Some of the dye initially in the salty layer gets entrained into the fresh water being warmed as does rise through the fresh layer. An interesting thing then happens; the water that rises through the fresh layer does have a tiny bit of salt in it, so when it reaches the surface and loses its heat to the lab, it then begins to sink down in these little plumes of slightly salty blue water. So this is a rather simple stratification, what happens if we make it just a little bit more complicated?

So here we have another experiment in the same tank, and it is again initially stratified. Only this time the initial stratification in the ambient gradually and continuously goes from salty at the bottom to fresh at the top, instead of just half-half salty-fresh 2 layer system from before. This is done with the same leaky boat as before, and uses a double-bucket system to fill the tank; you’ll see what a double-bucket system is later on in the course. Again, we need to be very careful so as to not mix away the stratification that we are trying to build. Once we have the uniform stratified ambient environment, we drop a couple of dye crystals into it as observe their dance; this oscillating vertical motion is called the buoyancy frequency, and it is something we’ll look at in the next couple of weeks. We fill the open cavity with hot water and begin to inject the dye again. The dye interacts with the warmed waters adjacent to the sidewall, and begins to mark their movements. Note that the dye doesn’t make it all the way to the top. Also, the dye begins to appear as if it is being concentrated into certain levels in the ambient and flow out into the interior. The vertical extent of these layers is about the same throughout the depth. There are secondary circulations going on within each of these distinct layers.

So there you have a set of demonstrations that explore some of the effects of stratification. Even in these simple cases, the effects are rather profound and change the fundamental behaviour of the system. We will be looking further into these processes and the consequences of stratification, and particularly the role that it plays in Earth’s climate. But before we do, there is another important aspect of climate dynamics that we will quickly introduce; and that is rotation.



