Coriolis acceleration

You have heard that the conservation of momentum equations in a rotating frame of reference have two additional forces, centrifugal and coriolis, and you have just seen that the centrifugal force that arises from Earth’s rotation doesn’t really have much of an effect on Earth’s climate system. Here we are going to look at the coriolis force, and see that this force does play a huge role in Earth’s climate.

To try to understand coriolis, are first going to consider one of my all-time favourite science experiments; the Foucault pendulum. This is a famous experiment devised by Leon Foucault in 1851 to demonstrate the fact that Earth rotates. It was originally set up in Paris, and is currently still operating in the Pantheon, but every self-respecting science museum will have a replica.

In essence, the Foucault pendulum is a large heavy ball suspended on a long wire from a fixed point; it needs to be so big and heavy so as to keep the inevitable friction forces small in comparison. The pendulum is on a unijoint so it is free to swing in any direction. When the pendulum is raised and let go to swing, it does so back and forth with a regular period, and because it is essentially friction-free, it will continue to swing back and forth for days. During this time, Earth rotates underneath it, so that the arc the pendulum traces out in the Earth’s frame of reference appears to be deflected. The pendulum is, however, decoupled from Earth, and just swinging back and forth in space; it is Earth that is rotating beneath it, and because we are in Earth’s frame of reference, it appears that the pendulum is rotating.

If you watched it from a fixed point in space, it would just look to be swinging straight back and forth. Try wrap your head around that one.

To help, I have set up a Foucault pendulum in the lab on a rotating table. It isn’t as grand as the original, and it is a bit affected by friction, but it can rotate much much faster. Here are two views; one from on the table and one from in the lab. 

In terms of the original pendulum, these views are equivalent to those on Earth or in space, respectively. Initially the table isn’t spinning; we begin by raising and releasing the pendulum. Initially, it is straight back and forth in both frames of reference. Then we begin rotating the table; in the lab frame of reference, the pendulum is still straight back and forth. In the table frame of reference. However, the pendulum begins appearing to be deflected. As the rotation rate of the table increases, so too do the apparent deflection of the pendulum. Yet in the lab frame of reference, the pendulum remains swinging straight back and forth. As the rate of rotation of the table continues to increase, the apparent trajectory of the pendulum begins to take on an increasingly curved path. When the rotation period of the table matches the period of the pendulum, the apparent trajectory becomes a circle. In the lab frame of reference the pendulum is still swinging straight back and forth, but in the table frame of reference the pendulum appears anything but straight. So which one is correct, and what does any of this have to do with climate dynamics?

Well, the large-scale motions of the atmosphere and ocean flow over vast distances and long times, and Earth is constantly rotating beneath them. Just like the pendulum, these motions are affected by this background rotation, and they appear to be deflected and follow curved trajectories relative to Earth. The magnitude of the apparent deflection depends on the rotation rate of Earth, and the velocity of the motions, specifically, the components of velocity that are perpendicular to the axis of rotation. The deflection itself, the coriolis acceleration, takes velocity from one perpendicular component and puts it into the other, and vise versa; the total speed of the object in this plane doesn’t change, only the velocity gets transferred between the perpendicular components.

So what does this mean- what are these perpendicular components? Well, if you are standing at one of the poles, the plane perpendicular to the axis of rotation is your local horizontal, so all horizontal x,y velocities are perpendicular to the axis of rotation. If you are standing at the equator, however, the velocities perpendicular to that axis of rotation are the east-west velocities and the vertical velocities; north-south velocities here are aligned with the axis of rotation. At latitudes between the poles and equator, the plane perpendicular to the axis of rotation varies with the sinusoid of latitude, and goes from having one horizontal and one vertical component at the equator, a combination of two horizontal components and a vertical component at mid-latitudes, to having purely horizontal components only at the poles.

Now let’s have a think about how big this coriolis acceleration might be. We know it depends on the rotation rate of Earth, which is 7.3x10^-5 rad/s, and the velocity of the object, which might be up to about 10-15m/s for atmosphere and 1m/s for the ocean (usually much smaller than these speeds), so that at its maximum, the coriolis acceleration might be on the order of 0.001m/s2.

This is way way smaller than gravity, even smaller than the centrifugal acceleration, so any coriolis acceleration that happens in the same direction of gravity is negligible.

What this argument means is that when considering the velocity components perpendicular to the axis of rotation, we need only consider the local horizontal velocities. Additionally, at the equator, where the plane perpendicular to the axis of rotation is locally vertical, the coriolis acceleration here is overwhelmed by gravity and thus negligible. At the poles, where the plane perpendicular to the axis of rotation is locally horizontal, the coriolis acceleration is maximum, and the strength of the coriolis acceleration varies sinusoidally with latitude between the poles and equator. This phenomena, that the coriolis acceleration depends on latitude, and is zero at the equator, is captured by the coriolis parameter f = 2 Omega sin(lat).

So when we include the coriolis acceleration into the navier-stokes equations, we typically group it with the inertial terms on the left hand side of the two horizontal equations, here and here. Note that the coriolis term in the x-momentum equation has a negative sign. So here we have the navier-stokes momentum equations for flow on a rotating planet; again, while we can write out the equations in full like this here, some of the terms are typically much much bigger than others, and we tend to drop the small terms and only keep a couple of the much bigger ones that are relevant to the dynamics of interest. We will go through that exercise next, and end up with the leading order dynamical balances that govern the horizontal motions of the atmospheric and oceanic systems in Earth’s climate.
