Ekman dynamics - breaking balanced flow

In the past couple of weeks we have been building our understanding of stratified, rotating fluid flows and seeing how they relate to Earth’s climate, specifically the ocean and atmosphere. We have tended to focus on the leading order force balances in the dynamics; we’ll take the complete set of momentum equations and do some scaling analysis to find the terms that are biggest, and pair them up as one balance or another. We have seen that vertical processes are dominated by the hydrostatic balance, and that horizotnal processes are governed by the geostrophic balance, and we’ve looked at some of the consequences of these balances. Here we ask what happens when we break these balances?

Consider a deep, steady flow that is in geostrophic balance, such that the flow in the x direction is some constant U, and the coriolis acceleration is to the right of this velocity as 2 Omega u, and that this is balanced by a pressure gradient in the cross-flow direction, dP/dy. The geostrophic current is flowing along isobars, and its coriolis acceleration balances the pressure gradient. There is no depth dependence to our system, so dP/dy and 2 Omega U are constant in depth.

A few lectures ago when we began our exploration into rotating flow dynamics, the first assumption we made was that the system was inviscid, and we eliminated the viscous force. Let’s not assume inviscid fluids right now, and we’ll add this viscous terms back into the geostrophic balance equation.

So lets take our steady geostrophically balanced flow and put in a lower boundary with a no-slip condition, so that the velocity at the boundary is zero, and it increases steadily as you move away from the boundary, up to some point well away from the boundary that doesn’t feel the effect of the no-slip boundary. From last week, we know that the velocity inside this boundary layer experiences a viscous force that changes its momentum, its velocity, and that in the non-rotating case it has some well described profile of velocity that steadily increases through the viscous boundary layer from zero at the boundary up to U away from the boundary. What happens when we add rotation to this viscous boundary layer problem?

Remember that the strength of the coriolis acceleration depends on the coriolis parameter f times the flow velocity U. And that in the geostrophically balanced state, the coriolis acceleration fU is balanced by the cross-flow pressure gradient dP/dy. The way that we set this problem up, the pressure gradient dP/dy has no depth dependence, and it is the same whether you are inside or outside the viscous boundary layer. But the flow velocity is sheared and slower inside the boundary layer, meaning that the coriolis acceleration fU is going to be smaller. If fU is smaller inside the viscous boundary layer, but dP/dy is the same inside or outside the viscous boundary layer, it means that the flow inside the boundary layer is no longer in a geostrophic balance; the corilis acceleration associated with this slower flow is no able to balance the pressure gradient dP/dy. As a result, the pressure gradient dP/dy will accelerate a flow, but this flow is IN THE Y DIRECTION.

That is, as you get close to the no-slip boundary, you decrease your U velocity, you break the geostrophic balance and begin to accelerate V velocities. These V velocities have a coriolis acceleration associated with them and no corresponding pressure gradient to balance them, so they will tend to be deflected by coriolis. The amount of deflection, the size of the coriolis acceleration fU, depends on the magnitude of the boundary layer velocity, which decreases as you get closer to the no-slip boundary. This describes a diminishing spiral of coriolis accelerations as you get closer to the boundary; the spiral is called the “Ekman Spiral”. So this process is what happens when you take viscous flow in geostrophic balance and expose it to a horizontal no-slip boundary; the geosptrophic balance between the coriolis and pressure forces is broken, and you end up with a diminishing spiralling flow in the viscous boundary layer as you get closer and closer to that boundary. This viscous boundary layer itself is referred to as the “Ekman Layer”, and it is an incredibly important concept in climate dynamics. It has a thickness that depends on the coriolis parameter f and the fluid kinematic viscosity, nu; it isn;t dependent on the density of the fluid, or the velocity of the fluid.

One neat property of this Ekman Spiral is that if you consider the all of the U, V flows accelerated at all depths through the viscous Ekman layer, and integrate these through the full depth of the Ekman layer, you end up with a net transport that is at 90 degrees to direction of the geostrophically balanced flow away from the boundary.

We can see the effect of the Ekman layer with a lab demonstration. Here, the tank is at solid body rotation with ducks, and particles on the surface as passive tracers, and purple dye being emitted from crystals on the bottom within the Ekman layer. Speeding up the rotation of the tank, results in an outward transport in the Ekman layer oriented at 45 degrees to the radius outwards; decreasing the tank rotation (spinning down the water) directs the transport in the Ekman layer inwards at 45 degrees to the radius.

Note that the flow in the Ekman layer demarcated by the purple dye is quite different to the flow throughout the rest of the tank, as indicated by the ducks and black particles.

This process is equivalent to a phenomena known as Einstiens’ tea leaves, whereby the tea leaves in a cup of loose leaf tea tend to settle on to bottom in the centre of the cup after you spin them up and let them come to rest.
