In this video we take a quick and qualitative look at how background rotation affects the behaviour of fluids. In terms of the climate system, this is important because Earth rotates about its axis once every day, and this has profound effects in shaping the circulations and abilities of the oceans and atmosphere to transport heat and perform the primary job of the climate. Here we explore the effect that it can have on simple fluid motions.

Recall the stratification demonstration that had an initially mixed homogenous salty water environment and the heated sidewall. That is essential what we have here- a big round tank of water with a central tube through which I inject fresh relatively light water. The black dots are floating on the surface and give an indication of the surface velocities. Initially everything is at rest, and I begin to inject the buoyant less dense water; it is buoyant, it wants to rise and spread out at the surface, just like it did in the previous demo. And indeed, this is what it does, spreading out as a circular axisymmetric buoyant surface current, as indicated by the particles and dye.

Now we want to repeat this experiment, only this time we will add rotation to the mix. This particular experiment has been rotating for about half an hour and the water is at rest with the tank; the particles aren’t moving relative to the tank. Once again, we inject the lighter fluid, same as before, and it again wants to rise and try to spread out. However, the lateral spreading of the surface current is affected by the background rotation; it stalls, and forms a conical wedge-like feature that is rotating relative to the tank. Eventually new small features develop on the edge of the conical wedge and they appear to be ejected from the main body of light water. The surface velocity field is anything but the uniform axisymmetric spreading of the non-rotating case. This truly is incredible; the simple addition of background rotation has a profound effect on fluid motions, and we’ll see that more and more in our upcoming investigations into climate dynamics.
