Meridional overturning circulation of the global oceans

Last week we focussed on atmospheric dynamics and how the conservation of potential vorticity sets up the general circulation of the atmosphere, and then how variability in this general circulation like planetary Rossby waves can manifest into the weather that we experience. This week we’ll shift our focus to the oceans, and begin by examining the global scale circulation that is responsible for much of the latitudinal heat transport by the ocean, and thus the role that the oceans play in Earth’s climate..

So we know that there is a latitudinal imbalance in Earth’s radiation budget, and that accounting for this is the primary job of Earth’s climate. In the case of the atmosphere, solar radiation penetrates through the atmosphere and heats Earth’s surface which then tends to warm the atmosphere from below. And at high altitude, the atmosphere re-radiates energy back out to space and cools the atmosphere from above; both of these heat fluxes, warming from below and cooling from above, tend to destabilise the stratification of the atmosphere and lead to active convection.

The ocean is a different kettle of fish; it is heated and cooled at the same horizontal surface, the upper ocean surface. Solar radiation is only able to penetrate into liquid water a few tens of meters, so all the suns energy that reaches the ocean goes into warming the upper 50m or so of ocean; and this upper ocean solar heating is strongest at the lower equatorial latitudes. This heating makes the ocean surface lighter and less dense than its surrounds and wanting to spread out to higher latitudes as a buoyant surface gravity current.

Now at high latitudes, the ocean is warmer than the atmosphere and tends to lose heat to the air above it as a sensible heat flux. In addition to this heat flux that cools the ocean, the air at high latitudes tends to be pretty dry and there are high rates of evaporation that have an associated latent heat flux from the ocean to the atmosphere that further cools the ocean, and this evaporation also makes the ocean surface saltier as only the ocean water is evaporated and the salt is left behind.

This combined set of heat and freshwater fluxes has the effect of making the high-latitude upper ocean dense, and it eventually becomes dense enough to sink through ocean stratification and become deep and bottom waters. These deep waters return equatorward at depth and balance the poleward transport of surface waters. 

It makes sense that these deep waters also must have a vertical transport and upwelling associated with them to balance the sinking of dense waters at high-latitudes. However, this upwelling is spread over a far larger area than the dense sinking at high-latitudes, so it is incredibly slow and difficult to measure. It is not likely to be uniformly distributed throughout the global ocean, but rather localised to specific regions or hot-spots. As you can probably tell and appreciate, there remains a lot to learn about the exact nature of this ocean upwelling; we know that it is required to close the global ocean overturning circulation, and important to understand it in order to capture the role of the oceans in Earth’s climate, but there is a lot about this upwelling leg that are still very open areas of research.

The global ocean overturning circulation is the largest scale circulation of the oceans, and it arises because of the heating and cooling that takes place at the same horizontal boundary, the top surface of the ocean. Here the high-latitude surface cooling is destabilising (it drives active convection), but the low-latitude surface warming is stabilising (it acts to strengthen and reinforce the ocean stratification). This configuration of convective overturning is referred to as horizontal convection; it is different from Rayleigh bernard convection which has vertically separated destabilisng buoyancy sources (which is like the atmosphere), or grashof convection where the buoyancy sources are vertically aligned but horizontally separated, like in double glazed windows in industrial or domestic settings. Horizontal convection has differential buoyancy forcing distributed along one horizontal. This idealised forcing configuration, and the convective overturning that results, serves as a leading order simple model for the overturning circulation of the global oceans, and are particularly useful tools to help us try to understand aspects of the overturning circulation, particularly upwelling processes that are so tricky to observe or simulate otherwise.
