Atmospheric Convection Cells and Jets

So we have seen that for general conditions, the planetary vorticity dominates over the relative vorticity, which leads to flows tending to be zonal, east-west oriented.

But we also know that the primary job of the climate is to latitudinally balance the radiation budget, which is going to require heat to be transported meridionally, or north-south. So how does a system that tends to be aligned zonally, or east-west, perform the job of transporting heat meridionally, north-south?

I would have liked to have put together my schematic that depicts the general circulation of the atmosphere, but I’m not that great of a digital drawer and there are so many wonderful teaching resources out there, so I’m not going to reinvent the wheel, and just use one that I’ve grabbed off the web.

At the equator, the sun’s radiation hits Earth’s surface and warms it up and evaporates moisture, so that the air there is warmed from below, and rises via convection. When it rises, the only place it can go is poleward, either north or south; along the way, this high-altitude air is deflected by Coriolis and tends to flow eastward, to the right in the north, and to the left in the south. As this air gradually moves poleward, it cools and rains, becomes dense and, by a latitude of about 30 degree north or south depending on the season, it sinks back to Earth’s surface. 

From our treatment of rising and descending air masses, we know that the region of rising around the equator is a low pressure region, and the regions of sinking around 30 north or south are high pressure regions.

At the surface, surface winds will want to flow from the high pressure regions to the low pressure region; these surface winds are affected by the coriolis acceleration and are deflected towards the west (right in the northern hemisphere, left in the southern hemisphere). These westward winds near the equator are known as the trade winds, and they come about because of coriolis and the equatorial convection cell, which is known as the Hadley cell.

Why is the Hadley cell limited to about 30 north or south? This is kind of an open question in climate dynamics, but there are theories. Perhaps the leading theory says that this is the latitude that corresponds to the amount of relative vorticity obtained by the convective processes at the equator. That is, the convection and associated upwelling at the equator leads to a convergence at the surface and a divergence at altitude, which both act to spin the air and change its relative vorticity. For the potential vorticity to be conserved, this air needs to adjust its height or latitude, and it isn’t really able to change its height, so it changes its latitude. The amount by which it needs to adjust its latitude to accommodate its change in relative vorticity is about 30 degrees. So the extent of this horizontal circulation cell is set by the relative vorticity change of the convecting air (which is in turn set by the heating and cooling rates), and the latitudinal gradient of the planetary vorticity (or how many degrees of latitude does the air need to move to accommodate a given change of relative vorticity). If the heating/cooling rates were different and able to drive a faster poleward flow, or the rotation of Earth were different, or the radius of Earth were different so the latitudinal gradient of planetary vorticity were different, the latitudinal extent of the Hadley would be would be different; again, Jupiter is a great example of this.

In addition to this Hadley cell at the equator, there is another pair of atmospheric convection cells that exists above the poles, these are known as the Polar cells. Here, air cools to space and sinks, flowing equatorward at the surface. Along the way, it warms at the surface and begins to rise, and closes the loop around 60 north or south. Again, the equatorward flows at the surface are deflected by coriolis, and they tend to flow towards the west; the poleward flows at altitude are also deflected by coriolis and tend to flow to the east. And again, as with the Hadley cell, the exact latitudinal extent of the Polar cells is an open area of research in climate dynamics.

If you draw the hadley and polar cells together, it seems that there should be another atmospheric cell in between them, although this cell is thermally-direct; as you draw it, it looks like it flows against the temperature gradient, and appears to move cool air poleward and warm air equatorward. The existence of this third cell, which is referred to as the Ferrel cell, is up for debate. The long-term averaging of circulation models indicates that it is there in the mean, but any given snapshot of the system suggests otherwise. But what is clear is that heat needs to get across this region, between about 30-60 north and south, and that the mean circulation is flowing in the wrong direction. What this tells us is that the time-dependent dynamics, the eddies and storms, are doing the heat transport across these latitudes.

Another point to note is that the polar cell brings cool air equatorward at the surface, while the Ferrel cell is bringing warm air poleward. These air masses meet and rise in the upwelling region between these cells, and maintain a strong latitudinal temperature gradient. As we have seen with the thermal wind equation, this strong temperature gradient drives a strong flow perpendicular to it, which is eastward in both northern and southern hemispheres. This strong flow is called the polar jet stream, and it is driven by the temperature difference between the polar and ferrel cells; this means that it is stronger in winter when the temperature difference is larger.

There is another high-altitude jet stream that exists between the hadley and ferrel cells. This feature is known as the sub-tropical jet stream, and is another very strong fast flowing winds at high altitude on the poleward flanks of the hadley cells. Unlike the Polar jet stream, the sub-tropical jet stream isn’t driven by the temperature gradient between the hadley and ferrel cells, but rather a consequence of the high-altitude poleward flow of air in the hadley and the coriolis acceleration it experiences.

So this structure of atmospheric convection cells and jets are what we refer to as the general circulation of the atmosphere. It is a result of the interaction between the differential heating at Earth’s surface and the background rotation of Earth. This general state can support a wide range of dynamics that affect how we experience Earth’s climate, which is weather. We’ll have a look into some of these in the upcoming few lectures.
