Land-Sea Breezes (Gravity Currents)

Last time we had a look at the dynamics of weather fronts; the dynamics that take place at the boundaries between cold and warm air masses. We saw that there are 4 types of fronts, (cold, warm, stationary and occluded), and approached these in terms of the Rossby wave phase or dynamics that they represent. While Rossby waves are an important mechanism for generating weather fronts, they aren’t the only mechanism. Here we will have a look at another mechanism for generating fronts; land-sea breezes.

The land and ocean have very different heat capacities. The heat capacity of water is about 4180 J/kg per degree (meaning it takes 4180 joules of energy to raise 1 kilogram of water by 1 degree celsius). The heat capacity of sand or soil is between 800 to 860 Joules pre kilo per degree; this means that for the same heat flux, the increase in soil temperature is more than 5 times that of water temperature. As such, when the sun is shining equally over the coastal regions, the land surface warms a lot more than the ocean surface. 

As a result of the land and ocean surfaces heating up, the air above them also warms and begins to convect. However, because the land warms more than the ocean, the air convecting above the land is more vigorous than that above the ocean, and by continuity, tends to draw air from the ocean surface onto the land. This onshore breeze, or sea breeze, is a result of the differential heating rates of the land surface and ocean surface.

The sea breeze brings relatively cooler air from the ocean into contact with relatively warmer air over the land. This frontal system, while typically much smaller scale and faster than the frontal systems generated by Rossby waves, has the potential to influence local coastal weather and can trigger rain and thunderstorms, particularly when the warm air over the land is already moist and humid.

These onshore sea breezes are a regular feature of coastal weather, often occurring at the same time and in the same direction each and every day.

Now when the sun goes down, the land and ocean surfaces cool to the air above. Again, because of the difference in heat capacities, the land tends to change its temperature faster than the ocean, leading to a cool air mass forming over the land and a relatively warmer air mass over the ocean. This drives another type of breeze, an offshore breeze called a land breeze. The land breeze is usually weaker than the sea breeze because the overnight cooling is more gradual than the daytime warming. Unsettled weather can occur as a result of the land breeze; this usually takes place offshore and can include rain and thunderstorms if the land air is sufficiently moist and humid.

The fact that the sea breeze is faster than the land breeze is an interesting point. It suggests that the speed of the breeze depends on the temperature difference between the surface air over the land and surface air over the ocean. And this is precisely the case; these on- and offshore breezes are density driven currents; flows that are driven by density differences in the fluid. Another term used to describe them are gravity currents. By now you would have seen gravity currents in the laboratory, and we will be looking into them in more detail in an upcoming lab session.
