In this video we will start examining fluid dynamics in rotating frame of reference.

We do this so as to better understand the large-scale geophysical flows of the atmosphere and ocean, which we experience in the rotating reference frame that is provided by Earth.

We begin by performing a reference frame transformation.

Up to now the focus of the course has been on understanding fluid flows in an inertial reference frame, where fluid motions are driven by pressure gradients and gravity

You have become familiar with the continuity equation for incompressible fluids

and the Navier-Stokes momentum equation

which for inviscid flows, reduces to Euler’s equations in three directions

where the horizontal accelerations are simply functions of their respective pressure gradients,

and the vertical equation maintains a gravitational component.

These equations are in an inertial reference frame, meaning the reference frame is homogenous, isotropic and time-independent.

Now, planets rotate, and thus do not provide an inertial reference frame.

So far, we have been able to overlook the fact that Earth is rotating, because the flows that we have been interested in have timescales much smaller than the planetary rotation timescale; this is a point we will return to soon.

Not always the case that background rotation can be ignored.

For instance, if we want to understand the dynamics of the bands on Jupiter, of those governing destructive weather events like Cyclone Winston, we need to account for the effects of planetary rotation.

To describe these flows with sensible equations, we need to first perform a bit of vector calculus to recast the equations of fluid motion into a rotating frame of reference.

{01} Consider a vector x in a fixed frame of reference, Rf, with some arbitrary origin O; this origin can be arbitrary because Rf is an inertial frame of reference.

{02} Now consider a second reference frame, Rr, this one is rotating about some axis that coincides with our arbitrarily located origin O. The rotation rate about this axis is omega. {03} Now the vector x is composed of two vectors relevant to this new frame of reference; x is composed of an along-axis component z and an off-axis component r, {04} which is also the radial distance from the axis of rotation.

This decomposition of x into its along-axis and off-axis terms introduces a new vector cross product, omega cross x, which is orthogonal to both the radius r and axis of rotation omega.

To relate the two frames of reference, one fixed and one rotating, it is best to consider their movement relative to each other.

For a vector x, this becomes two velocities, the rate of change of x in fixed frame, uf, and the rotating frame, ur.

So that for any vector x, the transform between the fixed and rotating frames is given in terms of this vector cross product, omega cross x, and the rates of change of x in the two reference frames (remember that one frame is moving relative to the other, so that these velocities cannot be identically zero simultaneously except in the case of the null solutions where omega or x are zero).

For fluids, we are often interested in accelerations, so it is convenient to perform this transform on the vector describing the fluid velocity in the fixed frame, u_f.

We know that uf is related to the velocity in the rotating frame, ur, by this equation, so we can make the substitution for u_f on the right hand side in terms of derivatives in the rotating frame, giving us the velocity in the rotating frame plus the term omega cross x.

We separate this out to get the acceleration in the rotating frame, the rate of change of omega cross x in the rotating frame, the cross product of omega and the velocity in the rotating frame, and this triple vector cross product, omega cross omega cross x.

Omega is invariant in time, meaning the time derivative only applies to x, giving a second omega cross u_r.

Lets pause here for a moment. We have the acceleration in the fixed frame equal to the acceleration in the rotating frame plus two additional terms: 2 omega cross u_r, which is called the Coriolis term, and this triple vector cross product omega cross omega cross x, called the centripetal term.

At this stage we substitute this transform back into the Navier-Stokes momentum equation in a fixed frame of reference, giving the total time derivative in the rotating frame plus the Coriolis and centripetal terms equal to the gravity, pressure gradients and viscosity terms.

###############################################

Lets first look at the centripetal term

From vector calculus relations, a triple vector cross product can be expanded like so giving the difference of two dot products,

For the centripetal term this becomes omega outside omega dot x - x outside of omega dot omega

Next we substitute the along-axis (z) and off-axis (r) components for x.

Now r and omega are orthogonal so their dot product is zero, z and omega are in the same direction, so the omega-omega-z here is the cancelled by the z-omega-omega there, leaving just the radial component and omega squared.

We can go one step further and express this as a gradient of a potential in r. We do so by integrating in r, getting, omega cross omega cross x as equal to the negative of the divergence in radius squared by omega squared over two.

As a potential, this centripetal term can now be combined with the gravity term to define a geopotential term, phi, where phi_g is the gravitational potential.

%This geopotential can be though of as g-star the gravity corrected for centripetal accelerations.

Physically, this geopotential term combines the local gravity and local centripetal accelerations by considering the radial distance to the axis of rotation.

So for Earth, this term is a minimum at the poles, where you are on the axis of rotation, and a maximum at the equator, and varies between them as a function of latitude.

Now, over billions of years, Earth has shaped itself such that its surface reflects this geopotential; Earth isn't perfectly round but is actually oblate, so that for studying something like the ocean, the ocean surface already follows a geopotential, thus already accounting for the influence of centripetal acceleration.

We substitute this back into the Navier-Stokes equation to recast the momentum equations in terms of the centripetal-corrected gravity.

% Luckily for our purposes, Earth has shaped itself over billions of years to reflect this geopotential; Earth is not round but actually oblate, so that for studying something like the ocean, the ocean surface already follows a geopotential, such that at the Equator it is several km further away from the centre of Earth than it is at the north pole, and we can often ignore the influence of centripetal accelerations.

The next term to examine is the Coriolis term, 2 omega cross u.

It is best to understand Coriolis in terms of the local rotating coordinate frame on Earths surface, 

where you are some angle theta from the equator.

The x-direction is E-W, y is N-S and z in locally vertical away from the centre of Earth.

Consider the rotation vector omega at this point.

In these coordinates, omega is sine with latitude in the vertical.

cosine latitude in the y (N-S),

has no x component (no E-W), 

We will be crossing this with the local horozontal velocity, but before we do lets do some quick scaling analysis in the vertical direction. This shows that omega sin theta is maximum at the poles, where the coriolis acceleration in the vertical will be at most on the order of u times omega. u for the ocean is typically under a metre per second, perhaps 10 meters per second for the atmosphere, but in either case it is this u times omega which is 10 to the neagative 5, so it is much much smaller than gravity. So we can ignore it.

Taking some velocity (u,v,w) at this point, 

2 omega cross u, approximates to ( (NEGATIVE 2 omega v sin latitude in the X, 2 omega u sin latitude in the Y, and 0 in the Z))- this is approximate because we have ignored the vertical component of the Coriolis force because it is much smaller than gravity.

This is normally written as ((-fv in the X, fu in the Y, 0)) where f = 2 omega sin latitude is referred to as the Coriolis parameter.

What is interesting to note here is that the E-W component of the Coriolis force depends on the N-S velocity, likewise the N-S component depends on the E-W velocity.

Also, the Coriolis force is a function of sin latitude, meaning it changes sign across the equator. This leads to atmospheric storms, ocean gyres, and many other flow features rotating in opposite directions for the north and south hemispheres.

Bringing the Coriolis and geopotential terms together into the Navier-Stokes equation gives us the momentum equation for flow on a rotating planet.

Question: for the radius of Earth 6.37 x 10^6m, a rotation rate of 7.3 x 10^-5, and gravity of 9.81, what is the distance difference between the centre of Earth and geopotential surface at the pole and equator?













































