Formation of Eddies: Barotropic and Baroclinic Instability

So we have seen the ocean circulation at its largest scale, the meridional overturning circulation, and have been working our way down through the scales towards the mesoscale. We have seen the basin scale gyres, and their western intensification and associated boundary currents, and the fronts that they are able to establish and maintain, and the eddies that perform the crucial job of transporting material across these fronts. But we didn’t actually look at how these eddies are generated. Here we will explore two eddy generation processes, barotropic instability and baroclinic instability, and see how these manifest to form ocean eddies.

We’ll begin with the barotropic instability; this is a type of instability that is independent of depth, so no vertical shear, and extracts energy from the background largescale mean kinetic energy field and transfers it to the mesoscale eddy field.

Imagine we have a front along which a zonal jet is flowing. The jet has a horizontal shear associated with it; it’s speed is maximum in the centre and decreases out towards its flanks. We make an assumption that the flow is purely horizontal, so there is no vertical velocity, and therefore, there is no divergence in the horizontal plane. Equivalently, this means the depth of the jet is constant, so that when we look at the potential vorticity of the jet, it reduces to simply the absolute vorticity, f plus zeta.

Since the flow is purely zonal, the relative vorticity zeta is just -dU/dy, so our potential vorticity reduces even further to be f - dU/dy.

Within our jet, the change in zonal velocity with latitude is dU/dy, which is also just our relative vorticity.

Now imagine some perturbation in y within our jet that takes fluid from one point and shifts it north. It is now in a region of greater f, so it should have a negative zeta anomaly for potential vorticity to be conserved. However, it is now in a region of the jet that has a different zeta, so this now needs to be considered to determine its response. If its zeta anomaly is small, smaller than its f anomaly, like in the case with a weak or no zonal jet, it would just experience a horizontal shear opposite to the new planetary vorticity and return back towards the original latitude, ultimately driving a westward flow, just like the planetary Rossby wave case.

If the zeta anomaly if large, specifically, larger than the planetary vorticity anomaly, the relative vorticity anomaly needs to be considered in the perturbation response. Because the perturbed fluid has some initial zeta and moves to a region with a different zeta, the sense of relative vorticity anomaly can actually be in the same direction as the background shear, and therefore operate to enhance the anomaly and grow the perturbation.

So what is important here is the latitudinal gradient of the planetary vorticity versus the latitudinal gradient in the horizontal shear across the jet, which is actually the latitudinal gradient in the relative vorticity. This is expressed as d/dy(f+zeta) =  beta - d2u/dy2 = 0 where beta is df/dy.

We know that df/dy is single signed and positive; if dzeta/dy ever becomes big enough to affect the growth of perturbations this expression will go through zero and become negative. So if the jet is sufficiently narrow and or intense that this expression ever crosses through zero, the system is prone to this barotopic instability; perturbations will be enhanced by the background horizontal shear and grow into meanders that ultimately develop into eddies.

Now we’ll have a look at baroclinic instabilities; this is a type of instability that does depend on depth, requires no horizontal shear, and extracts energy from the background available potential energy field and transfers it to the eddy field.

Consider a flow in thermal wind balance, so its isopycnals are sloped and its flow speed is a function of depth. At every level in this system, the coriolis acceleration is balanced by the horizontal pressure gradient that arises from the horizontal density difference. Imagine this is as perfect as possible, so the isopyncals are purely in the y direction and the flow is entirely in the u. The system is small enough to be in a region of constant f, so we don’t have to consider the change in f with latitude.

A perturbation on an isopycnal interface might lead to a local deepening of the interface. For this to occur, the fluid above must adjust its relative vorticity; a deepening or stretching of the fluid requires a cyclonic relative vorticity response. The fluid underneath is shallowed or squashed, requiring an anticyclonic response.

For continuity to be maintained in the system, somewhere else in the system must have the opposite perturbation, fluid above that isopycnal must experience a local shallowing or squashing, with an anticyclonic response, and the fluid below this second anomaly be deepened and stretched, with a cyclonic zeta response.

If these perturbations are periodic, with some regular wavelength and frequency, the fluid will experience alternating cyclonic and anticyclonic zeta responses. These relative vorticity anomalies will ultimately impart momentum into the fluid as they shear their surrounds. This will lead to displacements, but because the perturbations are periodic about some zero, these all average out to zero.

However, there will be some perturbations of specific wavelength and frequency and phase for which the relative vorticity responses reinforce one another; these perturbations will tend to amplify one another, leading to growing cyclonic and anticyclonic vorticies above and below the perturbed isopycnal. These growing, coherent vorticies can then have a rectified effect on the background state; that is, they can drive flows along their flanks. Remember that we are in a system that already has a background flow, the thermal wind balance, so any flows driven by these coherent vorticies will be swept along by the background flow. That is, except for the flows that are equal and opposite to the background flow. So the growing perturbations that we see are those that drive flows against the background thermal wind; this means they have a very specific set of properties, the standout of which is that their wavelength is the Rossby deformation radius, R = NH/f pi.

So while the flow is exposed to a whole spectrum of perturbation wavelengths and frequencies, the only one that is able to self-organise and grow is that which has the wavelength of the Rossby deformation radius. This is the reason why so much of the ocean’s background available potential energy, which are reflected in the sloping isopycnals throughout the global oceans, ends up in the eddy kinetic energy field at this very specific wavelength.
