Thermal wind (how we measure the ocean)

We have just seen a couple of useful applications that come out of the geostrophic balance, and here we take a look at another consequence of geostrophy. We have seen that the coriolis acceleration of the horizontal flow is balanced by the horizontal pressure gradient, and that this pressure gradient can be generated by a slope on the ocean free surface.

Now, the geostrophic balance relates flow to the horizontal pressure gradient; but variations or slopes of the free surface aren’t the only way to generate horizontal pressure gradients.

Another way is to allow the density rho to be a function of y and z.

Lets start by looking at the hydrostatic equation, dP-dz = rho*g. We differentiate this hydrostatic equation in y

Giving the horizontal change in the vertical pressure gradient is equal the horizontal change in density by gravity.

Gravity is invariant in y, so we have the double derivative of pressure in y and z as equal to the gravity times the horizontal gradient of density.

Next, we go back to the (x/y)-component of the geostrophic equation, and take the vertical derivative. This gives us the vertical change in u times the Coriolis parameter equals the vertical change of 1 on rho times the horizontal pressure gradient.

If we consider the density rho to be the uniform reference density plus some relatively small change from this, rho prime, the vertical gradient of the density is small enough to be ignored, giving the right hand side as the inverse of the reference density times the horizontal and vertical gradients of pressure.

So, what we have done is to differentiate the hydrostatic equation in y and the geostrophic equation in z, giving two equations with a common term of pressure, which we use to combine the two equations giving the vertical gradient of velocity as equal to the horizontal gradient of density. This is what we call the thermal wind equation- this is useful because we can measure the horizontal gradients of density with moorings or depth profiles, and thus estimate the flow between them.

This simple trick - cross-differentiating - is a neat little maths tool that we use when trying to equate different flow dynamics that depend of things that change in different directions. We will use this again in the next couple of week.

This is called the Thermal Wind equation; it relates variations in the density field to flow, and it is an incredibly useful relationship for observing the oceans and atmosphere.
