Ekman upwelling and downwelling

So last time we saw what happens when you have a geostrophically balanced viscous flow and introduce a no-slip boundary; close to the boundary, viscous forces slow the flow and break the geostrophic balance, accelerating cross-flow velocities that take the form of an Ekman Spiral that span the whole thickness of the viscous Ekman Layer. Integrating the transports at these different depths throughout the Ekman Layer gives you a net transport that is oriented 90 degrees to the geostrophic flow.

To do this, we are going to make one more addition to our system; we will consider what happens when the domain or dynamics of interest has some horizontal structure, so what happens when you have a vertical boundary like a coastline or if you have some horizontal dependence to your wind.

Lets go back to our setup of geostrophic flow above a no-slip boundary, where the far field flow is purely in the x direction and the integrated sum of the transport in the ekman layer is purely in the y direction, denoted here as vEk. Remember back to the lecture about continuity; we set up a couple of virtual sections and consider the transport through these. So we make a square column that extends all the way from the no-slip boundary up through the Ekman layer and into the geostrophic flow above. We align this column such that there is no flow through the x faces, only through the y faces. In the standard case, everything is uniform, and the flow through these opposite faces are balanced.

However, if one of these sides is blocked, maybe by a coastline, or if there is a difference in the geostrophic flow above these faces, there is an imbalance in the transports in the ekman layer.

That is, if there is horizontal divergence in the Ekman Layer, this needs to be balanced by vertical flow into the Ekman Layer from the overlying geostrophically balanced system.

Now we are going to apply this process to a couple of cases in the climate system. In the atmosphere, the Ekman layer is at its base where it feels viscous forces from land or ocean. For the ocean, however, it’s a little more complicated, but you have probably figured out by now that the ocean actually has two Ekman Layers, one at the bottom, which is just like the simple case that we have been considering, and one at the top, where it feels stress from the atmosphere. Wind blowing over the ocean exerts a surface stress and exchanges momentum between the two fluids, and this is equivalent to the simple case we have been considering, except instead of the bottom boundary being no-slip and the ambient fluid in balance, we have the boundary fluid flowing differently to the ambient fluid below.

So let’s take the ocean surface, and impose the wind stress, and drive an Ekman transport in the upper surface Ekman Layer. If there is horizontal divergence in this transport, if there are any regions that have net non-zero horizontal transport, there needs to be a vertical transport to account for this horizontal imbalance.

Case 1 is a coastline; imaging a steady wind blowing along the coastline, and driving an Ekman transport away from the coastline. Well away from the coastline the horizontal transport in the Ekman Layer might be balanced, but right up against the coast there is fluid being driven to flow offshore away from the coast, but nothing to balance this coming from the land. There is only one place where it can come from, and that is the deep. So an offshore Ekman transport at a coastline will lead to upwelling of deeper cooler waters, along with all the nutrients and ecosystems that it brings. Equivalently, an onshore Ekman transport will drive a downwelling near to the coast, leading to relatively warmer waters at the beach.

Case 2 is a weakish cyclone or a storm that has just made landfall. The centre of the storm is a region of low pressure. Let’s say that the flow around the storm is in geostrophic balance, with the coriolis acceleration that is oriented outwards balancing the pressure gradient oriented inwards. Close to the ground, the winds blowing around the storm are influenced by bottom friction and flow slower, such that their corilis no longer balances the pressure gradients. The Ekman transport in this case is inwards, in the direction of the pressure gradient. Once this Ekman flow converges the centre of the storm, there is nowhere else for it to go except upwards. This is Ekman upwelling in the centre of a low pressure system. This has follow in effects too; upwelling tends to condense any vapor in the air and lead to clouds and rain. The opposite dynamics happen too; a high pressure system has diverging flow in its Ekman layer, leading to downwelling, and more stabilising dynamics that tend to keep moisture as vapor and eliminate clouds, giving longlasting clearsky conditions.

So the Ekman boundary layers are regions where the rotating flows are able to very efficiently exchange momentum with each other or land or bottom topography. Their horizontal flow directions tend to be oriented with the pressure gradients outside the boundary layers. Vertical flows into and out of these layers are really important for coupling the ocean and atmosphere, and fluxing momentum to and from these viscous boundary layers.
