Introduce the concept of scaling analysis- use hydrostatic pressure as an example (why wouldn't a space elevator vent all the air to space?)

In the last couple of videos we have introduced a few concepts that govern fluid dynamics, and developed our understanding of continuity and the navier-stokes momentum equation. Now what we want to do is go through how we typically use these equations and take a look at one of the implications that arises from conservation of momentum, a concept that we refer to as hydrostatic pressure.

Let’s start by taking the vertical component of the navier-stokes equation. Think about a fluid that is at rest, so that its velocity w is zero, and it is steady, so that there is no time dependence. We can immediately cross out a bunch of these terms because they are zero. What we are left with are two terms on the right hand side; these two are forces, namely the pressure force and the gravitational force. For momentum to be conserved, these two forces need to balance.

We can rearrange this and bring the pressure force onto the left hand side, and integrate in the expression in the vertical direction, between integration limits of z=0 and z=H. If we assume the fluid is mixed and homogenous so that rho is constant, and it is incompressible, we find that the pressure difference between 0 and H is just rho*g*H. This is telling us that the pressure at H is just the sum of the mass of all the fluid above it. This is what we refer to as hydrostatic pressure or hydrostatic balance.

So, you are probably familiar with the idea that atmospheric pressure decreases as you go up in the air, and that plane cabins are pressurised so that people can fly in comfort at 35,000 feet (10668m). This is because you have less air above you. Pressure increases as you go down underwater too, as you have more fluid above you increasing the hydrostatic pressure. This is why submarines need to be capable of withstanding incredible amounts of pressure.

The deep sea vessel Avlin explored the Titanic wreckage at around 3810m deep; the hydrostatic pressure there is rho*g*H, 1030*9.81*3810 = 38MPa more than at the surface (or 5500psi if you know bikes). This is relatively shallow compared to the Trieste, the first crewed vessel to reach Challenger Deep in the Mariana Trench, 10916m, or 110MPa.

Hydrostatic balance is the zeroth order or leading balance in Earth’s climate system; it’s why the ocean is underneath the atmosphere, why the atmosphere is as thick as it is, and why rivers and glaciers flow into the ocean, why rain falls down. The magnitudes of the force terms involved in the hydrostatic balance are much larger than any others that you’ll see in other balances. So how we deal with this is to accept that this balance is absolute, and then look at effects and dynamics that operate around it.
