Cyclones

We have seen how the different types of fronts can be generated by Rossby waves operating on the prevailing eastward flowing jet steams, and how they can form locally due to land-sea breezes. Another frontal generation process is associated with cyclogenesis, although technically this isn’t so much of a frontal generation process as a frontal intensification process; the front needs to initially exist, even if its very weak, for the cyclone to form.

Now the purpose of this lecture isn’t actually the frontal dynamics of cyclones, but a general overview of cyclones themselves.

Remember back to the start of this week when considering the scaling of the conservation of potential vorticity, and we concluded that for very small rossby number flows the conservation of PV is essentially the conservation of f on h, because zeta is so much smaller than f.

Well, in a cyclone, that assumption is void; the horizontal wind shear in a cyclonme is enormous, and often larger than the planetary vorticity. So when dealing with cyclones, we need to hang onto the zeta term.

Here is a figure showing the trajectories of many many cyclones. They all tend to follow similar paths; from their point og genesis, they travel westward across the ocean basin, maybe hugging coastlines as they pass through regions with islands, and once them make continental landfall, they all hook poleward and travel inland to die.

So what is going on here? Why do they all share this behaviour?

The cyclones are energised from the air-sea interactions while they are over the ocean. When they make landfall, they immediately cease being energised from below to being eroded from below. Their base which is inside the viscous ekman boundary layer, is being slowed by friction with the land and leading to an inwards and upwards motion within the cyclone. This has the effect of slowing the rate of spin of the cyclone, or in other words, bringing the relative vorticity of the cyclone closer to zero.

 In the northern hemisphere, the relative vorticity of a cyclone is positive, zeta >0. In the southern hemisphere, where weather system flow in the opposite direction, the relative vorticity of a cyclone is negative. In both hemispheres, when you bring the relative vorticity zeta closer to zero, in order to conserve potential vorticity you need to take the planetary vorticity away from zero. So in the northern hemisphere, the reduction in zeta requires an increase in f, so moving to higher latitudes. In the southern hemisphere, the increase in zeta (bringing the negative zeta closer to zero) requires a reduction in f (taking the negative f further away from zero), which means moving to higher southern latitudes.

In both cases, the poleward shift of the cyclones after they make landfall is a consequence of the system conserving potential vorticity. This is an incredibly useful feature of the system, especially when trying to predict the trajectory of a potentially destructive cyclone.
